# Mobile App Store Analytics

Meiyappan Nagappan and Emad Shihab

## Introduction

Today, software engineering research focuses on traditional software systems like the Firefox web browser or Microsoft Windows, which take years to develop and teams of designers, developers and debuggers. Software engineering is rapidly changing though. Emerging domains, such as mobile devices, are growing rapidly and depend heavily on new software operating systems like Android and the applications that they run, commonly referred to as apps. Over the past few years, we have seen a boom in the popularity of mobile devices and mobile apps that run on these devices. Thus there exists considerable impact in solving the challenges faced by several different stakeholders like the mobile app developers, users, and platform owners (like Apple/BlackBerry/Google/Microsoft).

Mobile apps, unlike traditional software are distributed by the developers directly to the end users via a centralized platform called the app store. Along with the executable mobile app, the app stores contain a large set of meta-data about the app. For each app any end user is able to look at the name and contact details of the developer, description, sample screenshots, feature set of the app, number of downloads and the price for the app. Additionally, the app stores allow users to post reviews of the apps. This is very different from traditional software. Mobile app developers get continuous feedback from users that can be leveraged to help them. For example, as described below, prior work leveraged user reviews to extract user-faced issues and new requirements.

## Understanding End Users

One of the key characteristics of mobile app stores is the fact that they allow users to review their apps. Generally, these app reviews consist of two parts: an app star-rating (of which an aggregate makes up the overall app-level rating) and a review-comment that is used to rationalize the star-rating. Previous research has shown that users tend to write reviews when they are either extremely satisfied or extremely dissatisfied with a product [1]. The low star-reviews have a greater impact on sales than high star-reviews, since buyers are more likely to react to low ratings and complaints [2]. It has also been proven that such user reviews can have a high impact on download counts (i.e., purchases) and are a key measure of the app’s success.

Therefore, it is always in a developer’s best interest to make sure app reviews are as good as possible. To ensure high app ratings, a number of studies leverage app review analytics to help developers understand their users. An example of such a study is one that uses app reviews to understand “why users give low ratings to apps?” [3]. In particular, the aim of the study was to examine the most frequent and the most negatively impacting types of complaints users have. Since the study’s goal was to understand complaints, it focused only on 1 and 2 star reviews of 20 different iOS apps. A statistically significant sample (6,390) of user reviews were manually examined and tagged. The tags were meant to summarize the type of complaint the user mentions (e.g., a complaint about a functional error or a privacy issue with the app). Then, the tagged reviews were grouped and different analytics were calculated to make some insightful recommendations to developers about negative app reviews.

Since the main goal is to identify the different types of user complaints so developers can avoid them, the study starts by determining the most frequent types of complaints. The study found that the majority of negative app reviews can be classified into twelve different categories, namely (ordered in descending order of frequency), Functional Error; Feature Request; App Crashing; Network Problem; Interface Design; Feature Removal; Hidden Cost; Compatibility; Privacy and Ethical; Unresponsive App; Uninteresting Content; and Resource Heavy. In fact, the three most common complaints, i.e., functional errors, feature requests and app crashing accounted for more than 50% of the reported complaints. Examining these complaints can help developers identify existing problems, and give guidance on potentially new features for their app. In fact, follow on work by Iacob et al. [4] showed that app reviews can be mined to successfully identify new app feature requests.

In addition to simply determining the most frequent complaints, the study also investigated the most negatively impacting types of complaints. To do so, the study calculates the ratio of 1 to 2 star ratings for each complaint. This ratio helps us identify the most negatively-perceived complaints. The findings showed an interesting and complementary view to the findings about the most frequent complaints. The most negatively-impacting complaints are related to privacy and ethical issues, hidden costs and feature removals (i.e., disliked features that are degrading the end-user experience). The three aforementioned complaints were not the most frequent, however, clearly they are most negatively perceived by app users. On the other hand, the most frequent complaints (e.g., functional errors), tend to be not as impacting. The study is a clear example of how user app review analytics can be leveraged to help mobile app developers better understand their users. More about this study is available in the full article [3].

## Conclusion

Researchers have begun to mine the data in the mobile app stores to address relevant software engineering issues [5, 6]. Additionally, several companies like App Annie, (which recently bought another company - Distimo) and Appfigures have even built successful businesses selling intelligence gained from observing the evolution of several hundred thousand apps in the app stores. Some advancements made by mining app store data include: code reuse in mobile apps, monetizing apps through ads, testing mobile apps, addressing device fragmentation, resource usage and optimization, and teaching programming on mobile devices. Practitioners can therefore, leverage the tools built and intelligence gained through app store to help them deliver higher quality products to end users in a shorter time span.

## References

[1] N. Hu, P. A. Pavlou, and J. Zhang. Can online reviews reveal a product’s true quality?: empirical findings and analytical modeling of online word-of-mouth communication. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, EC ’06, pages 324–330, 2006. 

[2] J. A. Chevalier and D. Mayzlin. The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book reviews. Journal of marketing research, 43(3):345–354, 2006. 

[3] H. Khalid, E. Shihab, M. Nagappan, and A. Hassan. What do mobile app users complain about? Software, IEEE, 32(3):70–77, May 2015. 

[4] C. Iacob and R. Harrison. Retrieving and analyzing mobile apps feature re- quests from online reviews. In Proceedings of the 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR ’13, pages 41–44, 2013. 

[5] F. Sarro. The UCLAppA Repository: A repository of research articles on Mobile Software Engineering and App Store Analysis. Online: http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/F.Sarro/projects/UCLappA/UCLappArepository.html 

[6] M. Nagappan, E. Shihab. Future Trends in Software Engineering Research for Mobile Apps. In Proceedings of the Future of Software Engineering track at 23rd IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER 2016), March 14 - 18, 2016, Osaka, Japan.
