#Limitations and context of research
_Brendan Murphy_
  
The software industry has existed for over 60 years and is now a massive multinational, multi-billion dollar industry. Software controls a vast amount of our daily lives from providing entertainment, controlling household goods, controlling transport systems, providing world-wide services such as search. The objectives and attributes of software ranges from small game applications which focus on fast feature deployment, to software controlling planes whose focus is fault and safety tolerance. The products range in scale from software that runs on individual mobile phones all the way to a search engine running across tens of thousands of machines distributed across multiple server fames distributed around the world. During this time the number of people working in the software industry has expanded significantly as has the number of software engineering researchers. In theory these software engineering researchers should be driving the future of software development, but even the most optimistic software engineering researcher would not make this claim. The increase in the number of people developing software should have resulted in an increase in the numbers attending research conferences to learn what is happening in the field of research. In reality there is concern within the research community of the lack of practitioners attending software engineering conferences. 

This section examines research limitations which may explain its apparent disconnect with the software engineering industry. A number of these issues are inter-related and are detailed below 

##Small Research Projects:

As discussed above there are great variations in the type of software being developed and many factor that can influence the development. The accuracy of any study is dependent on the ability of the researchers to interpret any results and a major factor influencing this is how clean the data is, data cleaning can take significant domain knowledge, enabling researchers to interpret whether exceptions are valid or invalid. Often research will be performed on small projects due to the lack of availability of data from the larger projects. These small projects can be controlled by the researchers but are often contrived projects using students as developers. In these project researchers focus on a small number of development attributes on a single or small number of products. The results of these studies are unique to the data set and product and are rarely reproducible on any other data set for any other product. Open Source and repositories like GitHub have helped researchers get access to software project developments but as discussed later in the chapter, these repositories have issues of data quality. Additionally with the exception of Eclipse data from few large software developments are available for research. 

Although, due to necessity, papers often make claims that results are generic, which often undermines the research in the eyes of practitioners. Whereas the potential consumers of research are commercial developers who would like to see the results in their own context, often large proprietary software developments, and therefore would struggle to understand how to apply research to their project. This differs from research disciplines like systems where SOSP conference has papers on large research projects based on the work of many researchers. 

##The importance of being the first author on a publication:

A significant driver of researchers wishing to publish in conferences, is the need for publications requirements to allow students to graduate. For the students, it is very important that they are the first author of any paper so they can claim ownership of their work, another factor is the importance of conferences that publish their work. This inevitably results in two limiting factors

* The research project are small as there is limited resources that can be applied to the projects as other students in the group would focus on their own projects than that of their colleagues.
*  Each student, and tenure seeking faculty member is supposed to carving their own unique research area which is shown through being the first author on the paper, but also detracts from the work of the collaborators on the paper.  

Other research disciplines who try to promote larger research projects, will place authors in alphabetic order, and credit the work to all authors.

##Requirements for novel research techniques:

One of the major criteria’s for paper publication in both journal and conferences is the novelty of the technique. As has been discussed above there is great variations in the type of software products, their attributes and the development methods applied. Additionally software development is a human activity and as such has great variations between different development teams even if they are applying the same development techniques. To fully understand the universality of a specific finding, the same research experiment should be applied to numerous products developed by different development groups. But replicated studies are implicitly discouraged in software engineering because top software engineering venues reject papers that are not considered to be novel research areas.

Most other engineering disciplines welcome the publication of applying the same engineering techniques within different environments. For instance Medical journals encourage replicated trials, applied to different set of patients which often result in different results. The medical journals value the ability of the researchers to interpret the differences between the two trials, this enhances the general knowledge of the discipline. The lack of replicated studies in software engineering research results in the limitations of any proposed technique not being fully understood and more importantly its limitations will be unknown. As practitioners understand that most techniques have limitations then they will not apply any new techniques whose limitations are unknown. 

The quality of papers, within the research community is measured by the number of citations in other research papers. Conferences (FSE, ICSE) define influential papers over time based on the ‘novelty’ of the idea and the number of citations. Other engineering disciplines, logically, measures a papers influence based on its impact on industry.   

##Data Quality of Open Source Repositories:

Over recent years there has been a significant increase in the amount of data available to System Engineering researchers due to the increase in developers using open repositories such as GitHub. This has opened up a vast resource of software development activity for research. But there are various data quality issues which hinders interpretation of its results, specifically;

1.	GIT provides tremendous flexibility in how code can be moved between branches, but that flexibility can result in a lot of data attributes, such as on which branch a change was made and the time order it occurred, being lost.
2.	Triaging of bug data: A bug submitted to a repository may not be re-producible due to lack of data, or insufficient description of the defect. Additionally a submitted bug may be a replica of an already existing bug in the repository. In theory engineers when correcting or discarding a bug will properly document the reasons for their actions, in practices they rarely do as it is far too time consuming. As such it is difficult to relate the bugs in the repository to defects in the software.   
3.	Definition of the complete product: Often the code repository will contain a master branch, with the natural assumption is that all code in that branch form the released product. In reality the code in the master branch will be a mixture of product, test and process code, often developed using different criteria, complicating interpretation of any results. 
4.	Source code from industry are often limited to post release information (e.g. Android): A much richer data set would be the development period but that is rarely made available.
5.	Limited access to and identification of developers: A major issue with analysis of Software Engineering data is the management of exceptions. The simplest way of interpret data is to talk to the engineers responsible for the development, without access to the developers the researchers manage outliers using statistical techniques which may not necessarily be accurate. 

##Lack of Industrial Representatives on Conferences

The steering committees, chairs and Program Committees are dominated by academics, with few industrial representatives, with most of these being from research departments within industry. While academics personally benefit from working on conferences, industrial practitioners get little recognition within their companies for working on conferences, and may need to work on the conference in their own time. Additionally as these conferences grow the amount of work required from people on the committee, the recent ICSE conference required each PC member to review 18 papers, to respond to authors comments and to discuss the papers with other reviewers. As the number of industrial representatives on conferences drops it is inevitable that these engineering conferences will increasingly focus on academics interests without any reference on whether those interests are relevant to the software industry.  

##Research from Industry:

As previously noted industry involvement in Software engineering conferences is limit. A factor in this is the decrease in the number of research labs existing in industry, with companies closing down or limiting their research departments, and newer companies not creating new labs, although a number of these companies do employ researchers who do submit research material for publications. A major source of publications from industry are those written by interns, studying at universities but working in industry for a short period of times. 

Industrial researchers have access to a much richer data set than academic researchers, using open source data. This is due to product teams often triaging bug data to identify replicated bugs and to discard bugs that are non-reproducible. Additionally industrial bug data will often contain a reference to any resulting code changes. Industrial researchers often have full access to developers and product information allowing them to better interpret their results. They also have the flexibility to apply the same techniques to different data sets for the same or equivalent product developed by different product groups within the same company, resulting in much larger experiments and a greater ability to identify limitations in any technique. 

A major issue is industrial research limiting the access to the raw or interpreted data. They also rarely provide absolute values in their papers, leaving the y-axis values in graphs blank. There are many reason for this as firms may fear for their reputation is the absolute values of bug reports were published. Another frequent reason is that data may contain information of products from other companies, which they do not have the right to release. For instance Windows crash data contains a large amount of non-Microsoft failure data, including names of 3rd party drivers and applications. This can produce negative reactions by academic reviewers of papers written by industry. 

There are also practical issues regarding getting industry people to contribute to conferences or journals. The most important factor is the majority of industry practitioners will not personally benefit from getting work published, as that is not there primary job. To attend a conference they will need permission to attend, so their company will have to view attending a conference as beneficial. Ironically the greater the amount of industrial participation at a conference the more attractive the conference is to industry. Industrial practitioners are also at a disadvantage as the structure of academic papers are different to those in industry, so practitioners often struggle to ensure the paper meet all the required criteria.

##Summary 

There has been a growing disconnect between software engineering research and software practitioners, and based on the underlying factors driving academia, discussed in this chapter, this disconnect is only going to increase. There are numerous people within academia who work closely with industry, but perversely publishing the results of these joint collaboration is more difficult than focusing on purely theoretical areas. To improve the impact of software engineering research, in terms of its applicability in the software industry, will require universities to change the way they measure the contribution of their students, decreasing the focus on published papers and increasing how they value their contributions to the field. Conferences should actively recruit people from industry to help drive their direction, which requires the conferences to lower the burden on participating in the conference. Additionally conferences, and technical journals need to focus less on the quality of the paper, in terms of its structure and technical content, and rather they should focus on how much the paper adds to the general knowledge of Software Engineering.  
  
